The Joe Rogan experience. But I think if I.
Was in the future,
some weird dystopian future where artificial intelligence runs everything and,
and human beings are linked to some sort of
neurological implant that connects us all together.
And we long for the days of biological independence.
And we would like to see what it,
what was it like when they first started inventing phones?
What was it like when the internet was first opened up for people?
What was it like when people saw when, when,
when someone had someone like you on a podcast and was talking about
potential artificial intelligence of where it could lead us and what could the
most interesting time, time? Yeah, that's,
what's cool about it to me is that we seem to be in this,
this really Goldilocks period of great change while we're still human,
but we're worried about privacy. We're concerned.
Our phones are listening to us. We're concerned about surveillance dates and,
you know, people put little stickers over the laptop camera, we see it coming,
but it hasn't quite hit us yet.
We're just seeing the problems that are associated with this
increased level of technology in our lives.
Which is yeah, that, that is a stretch thing. If we add up all these pieces,
it does put us in this very weirdly special position and you
wonder, Hm it's a little bit too much of a coincidence.
It might be the case, but yeah, it does put some strain on it.
When you say a little too much of a question. So.
Um, I mean, I guess the intuitive way of thinking about it, like what way,
like what, what are the chances that just by chance you would happen to be, uh,
living in the most interesting time in history being like a celebrity,
like whatever, like that's pretty low prior probability. Like most people,
well from you, I mean far far, but for all of us. Um,
um, and so that, that, that could just be, I mean, I, I w if there's a lottery,
someone has got to have the ticket. Right. But, um, um,
or yeah, or, or, or we are wrong about this whole picture.
And, uh, there is some very different structure in place that's,
which would make our, uh, experiences more typical.
That's what I was getting to I, so I gathered, yeah.
So how much have you considered the possibility of a
simulation?
Well, a lot. I mean, I, I developed a simulation argument. Yes. Um,
back in the early two thousands. And so, uh, yeah,
but I.
Mean, I know that you developed this argument and I know that you've,
you've spent a great deal of time working on this, but personally,
the way you view the world, how much,
how much,
how much does it play into your vision of what reality is?
Well, um, it's oh.
Hard to say. I mean,
for the majority of my time,
I'm not actively thinking about that. I'm just like, you know, living.
And, uh,
now I have this weird that my work is actually to think about big picture
questions. So it kind of comes in
through my work as well, when you're trying to make sense of our position,
our possible future prospects, that leavers,
which we might have available to affect the world. W what,
what would be a good and bad way of pulling those leavers, then,
then you have to try to put all of these constraints and considerations
together. And in that context, I think it's important. Um,
I think if you're just going about your daily existence,
then it might not really be very useful or relevant
to, uh, constantly like,
try to bring in hypothesis about the nature of our reality and stuff like that.
Because for most of the things you're doing on a day-to-day basis,
like they work the same, whether it's inside a simulation or in basement level,
physical relative, like you still need to get your car keys out,
you still need to. Right. So in some sense,
it kind of factors out and is irrelevant for many practical intents and
purposes. What.
Do you remember when you started to contemplate the possibility of a summer?
Um, Hmm, no, I, I mean, I remember when,
when the simulation argument occur to me, so, which is less, it's not just,
I mean, as far as long as I can remember it, I can, yeah. I mean,
maybe it's a possibility, like, oh, it could all be a dream.
It could be a simulation, like, yeah. But, but, but that,
that there is this specific argument that,
that kind of narrows down the range of possibilities and where the simulation
hypothesis is done. One of only three kind of options.
What are the three options? Um, well,
one is that there is all almost all civilizations at our current
stage of technological development go extinct before reaching technological
maturity. That's like option one kind of would be fine.
Technological maturity, well say having developed,
at least all those technologies that we already, uh,
have good reason to think are physically possible. Okay.
So that would include the technology to build extremely large and powerful
computers, uh,
on which you could run detailed computer simulations of conscious
individuals. Um, so that that's kind of,
kind of would be a pessimistic. Like if that's, if,
if almost all civilizations is our stage failed to get there, that's bad news.
Right. Because we've done, we'll fail as well. Almost certainly.
That's one possibility. Yeah. So that's option one. Uh,
option two is that there is a very strong convergence among all technologically
mature civilizations, uh,
in that they all lose interest in creating ancestor simulations or these kinds
of detailed computer simulations.
Self-conscious people like their historical predecessors or variations. So,
so maybe they have all of these computers that could do it,
but for whatever reason, they all decided not to do it.
Maybe there's an ethical imperative not to do it or some other, I mean,
we don't really know much about these post-human human creatures and what they
want to do and don't want to do so post human creatures I'd imagine that by the
time they have the technology to do this, yes,
they would also have enhanced themselves in many different ways. Right.
And so perhaps.
Enhancing their ability to recognize the consequences of creating some.
Sort of a yeah. Yeah.
That would almost certainly have cognitive enhanced themselves, for example.
Well, is the concept of downloading consciousness into a computer.
It almost ensures that there's going to be some type of simulation. If you're,
if you have the ability to download consciousness into a computer,
once it's contained into this computer, what,
what is what's to stop it from existing there,
as long as there's power.
And as long as these chips are firing and electricity is
being transferred, data is being moved back and forth.
You would essentially be in some sort of a simulation.
Well, I mean, if you have the capability to do that and also the motor yeah.
It would have to simulate something that resembles some sort of a
biological interface. Otherwise it's not going to know what to do. Right. Yeah.
So, so.
Um,
so we have these kind of virtual irrelative environments now that are imperfect,
but improving. And you could kind of imagine that they get better and better,
then you'll have a perfect virtual reality environment. Um,
but imagine also that your brain,
instead of sitting in a box with big headphones on some glasses on like that the
brain itself also could be part of the simulation, the matrix. Uh, well,
I think in the matrix, there are biological humans outside of plug-in. Right,
right.
But if you could include in the simulation just as you
have maybe simulated coffee mugs and Carson, et cetera,
you could have simulated brains that it, and,
and so here is one assumption coming in from outside the
simulation argument, and one can talk about it separately,
but it's the idea that, um,
I called it the substrate independence thesis that you could in principle have
conscious experiences implemented, um, on different substrate.
It doesn't have to be carbon atoms as it,
as it's the case where the human brain,
it could be Silicon atoms that that creates conscious experiences is some kind
of structural feature of the computation that is being performed, uh,
rather than the material that is used to underpin it.
So in that case,
you could have a simulation with detailed simulations of brains in it where
maybe neuron and signups disseminated,
and then those sprints would be conscious.
So accessibility number two. Well.
No. So the possibility number two is that these tumors just are not at all
interested in doing it and not just that, some of them don't,
but like all these civilizations that reach technological maturity,
that's kind of pretty uniformly. Just don't do that. And what's number three,
uh, that we are in a simulation, the simulation hypothesis.
And where do you lean?
Well, I,
I didn't really tend to punt on the question of precise probabilities there.
I mean, I think it would be a probability thing, right? Yes.
It assigned some to each, but, um, yeah, I I've,
I've refrained from giving a very precise number part,
partly because, I mean, if I said some particular number,
it would get cultivated and it would create this maybe a sense of false
precision. Um, the argument doesn't allow it to derive this,
the probabilities XYZ.
It's just that at least one of these three has to obtain.
Um, so yeah, so that, that narrows it down. Like, because you might think,
you know, why do we know the future is big?
You could just make up any story and we have no evidence for it.
It seems that there actually,
if you start to think everything through quite tight constraints, um,
on what probabilistically coherent views you could have,
and it's kind of hard even to find one overall hypothesis that fits
this and various other considerations that, that we think we know.
The idea would be that if there is one day the ability to create a
simulation, that it would be indiscernible from reality itself.
That if like, say if we are not in a simulation yet,
if this is just biological life,
we're just extremely fortunate to be in this Goldilocks period.
But we're working on virtual reality in terms of like Oculus and all
these companies are creating these consumer-based virtual reality things that
are getting better and better,
and really kind of interesting that you got to imagine that 20 years ago there
was nothing like that 20 years from now, it might be indiscernible. You might,
you might be able to create a virtual reality.
That's impossible to,
to discern from the reality that we're currently experiencing.
Or, or maybe 20,000 years. So 20 million years,
like the argument makes no assumption at all about how long it will take. Yeah.
But one day, if things continued to improve computational power,
the ability to replicate experiences and even feed back in terms of
like biological feedback, touch and feel, and smell,
if they figure out a way to do that one day,
they will have an artificial reality.
That's indiscernible from reality itself. And if that is the case,
how do we know if we're in it, right?
That, that is roughly the, the, the gist of it. Now I,
as I said, I think, um, if you simulate the brain also,
uh,
you have a cheaper overall system than if you have a biological component in the
center, it's surrounded by virtual reality gear.
And so you could for a given cost,
I think create many more ancestor simulations with simulated brains in them,
rather than biological brains with VR gear solved most in these
scenarios where that would be a lot of simulations, most of those scenarios,
which would be, uh, the, the, the kind of where everything is digital,
because it's just cheaper with mature technology to do it that way.
This is, uh, one of the biggest, for lack of a better terms,
mind when you really stop and think about reality itself,
that if we are living in a simulation, like what, what is it and why,
and where does it go and how do I respond?
How do I move forward? If I really do believe this is a simulation? W what,
w what am I doing here? Yeah. That was a big questions, huge questions.
Um, not some of them arise, even if we're not in a simulation.
Yeah. And aren't there people that have done some strange,
impossible to understand calculations that are designed to determine whether or
not there's a likelihood of us being involved in a simulation currently.
Yeah. I, I think it slightly misses the point. So the,
I think,
so there are these attempts to try to figure out the computational
requirements, uh,
that would be required if you wanted to simulate some physical system
with perfect precision.
Saw.
Um, if we have some human or brain, a room that to say, and if we want to,
dissimulate every little part, every atom, every subatomic particle,
the whole quantum wave function. Um,
and what would be the computation, a load of that,
and would it be possible to build a computer powerful enough that you could
actually do this now?
I think the way that this misses the point is that, um,
it's not necessary to simulate all the details of this
environment that you want to create in an ancestry simulation.
You would only have to simulate it in so far as it is perceptible to the
observer inside of the simulation. So if,
if some post-human civilization wanted to create, uh, Joe Rogan, uh,
doing a podcast simulation that needs to simulate Joe Rogan
sprain, because that's where the experiences happened.
And then whatever parts of the environment that you are able to perceive.
So surface appearances, maybe off the table on walls Navy,
they would need to simulate me as well,
or at least a good enough simulacrum that I could sort of spit out words that
would sound like they came from a real human, right.
I don't know that now we're getting quite good with this GPT to like these kinds
of AI that just spews out words with,
I don't know whether anyway, so, so you'd have with like,
what is happening inside this table right now is completely irrelevant.
You have no idea of knowing whether there even are atoms terror. Now,
now you could take a big electron microscope, um, and,
and look at find finer structure. And then,
then you could take an atomic force microscope,
and you could see individual atoms even,
and you could perform all kinds of measurements.
And it might be important that if you did that,
you wouldn't see anything weird because physicists do these experiments and they
don't say anything weird, but then you could kind of fill in those details,
like if, and when somebody were performing those experiments,
that would be vastly cheaper than continuously running all of this.
And so this is the way a lot of computer games are designed today that they have
a certain rendering distance.
Like you only like actually simulate the virtual world when,
when the character goes close enough, that you could see it. Right. Um,
and so you might have these kinds of super intelligent post humans doing this.
Obviously they would have figured that out and a lot of other optimizations. So,
so these, in other words, these calculations are experiments.
I think don't really tell on the hypothesis.
Without assigning a probability to either one of those three scenarios.
What makes you think when you,
if you do stop and think, I think we're in a simulation, what,
what are the things that are convincing to you? Well.
It would mainly go through the, the simulation argument that if,
if to the extent that I think the alternative to hypothesis are improbable,
then that would kind of shift the probability mass on the third remaining.
Is it really only.
Three? So the, the, the ones are we,
that human beings go extinct.
And the other civilizations. So at our stage in the cosmos or whatever,
yes, this is strong. Yeah. Strong filter.
Okay.
That they either go extinct or they decide not to pursue all those same tests,
or it becomes a simulation. Is that really the only thing? Well, I.
Think the only three live options now, so you can, I, I can get,
you can kind of unfold the argument a little bit more and look more granular.
So I suppose that the first two options are false.
So some non-trivial fraction of civilizations that are stage to get through.
And some non-trivial fraction of those are still interested.
Then.
I think you can convince English, show that, um,
by using just a small portion of their resources, they could create very,
very many simulations.
And you can show that or argue for that by comparing the computational power
of systems that we know are physically possible to build.
Um, we can't currently build them,
but we could see that you could build them with nanotech.
And if you have planetary sized in our resources on the one hand,
and on the other hand,
estimates of how much compute power it would take to a human brain,
uh, and, and you find that a mature civilization would have many,
many orders of magnitude more so that even if they just use 1% of their compute
power of one planet for one minute, they could still run, you know,
thousands and thousands and thousands of these simulations.
And they might have billions of planets and they might last for billions of
years. So, so the numbers are quite extreme. It seems. Um, so then,
then what you get this,
this implication that if the first two options are false,
it would follow that that would be many,
many more simulated experiences of our account.
Then they would be original experiences of our account.
So the idea is that if we continue to innovate, if, if,
if human beings or intelligent life in the cosmos continues to innovate that
creating a simulation is almost inevitable. No, no. I mean,
the second might be a.
Yeah. And, and others with the same capability.
They don't decide not to, if they don't decide to not choose, if we,
the first option, if human beings do, uh,
figure out a way to not die and stay,
stay innovative,
and we don't have any sort of natural disasters or manmade created disasters,
then step two, if we don't,
we don't decide to not pursue this.
If we continue to pursue all various forms of technological
innovation, including simulations, that it becomes inevitable.
If we get past those two first options,
it becomes inevitable that we pursue it well.
So if they have the capacity, then they will do it. And the, the,
the motive or the desire to do so that then,
then that would create hugely many of these.
So not just one simulation, right.
But because it's so cheap at the technological maturity,
if you have a cosmic empire of resources, um, it, it,
it don't have to have a very big decide to do this. They might just think, well,
you know, um, well, that.
Was the big question that Elan said he would ask artificial intelligence said
what's beyond the simulation. Okay. That's the real question.
If this is a simulation, if there's many,
many simulations running currently what's beyond the simulation. Well.
Yeah. You might be curious about that. I mean,
I think the more important question would be like, what do we,
all things considered, uh, have the most recent to do in our situation? Like,
what would it be wise for us to do? Is that like some way that we can be,
um, helpful or have the best life or whatever you.
Call that ridiculous to even consider, maybe it's beyond us.
What the question of what is outside?
Yes. Well, I mean.
I don't think it's ridiculous to consider, I think, uh, it might be beyond,
but when maybe we would be able to form some abstract conception of what it is.
I mean, in fact, if, if we, if, if there,
if the path to believe the simulation hypothesis is the simulation argument.
I mean, we have a bunch of structure there that gives us some idea I'd like,
that would be some advanced civilization that they would have
developed a lot of technology over time,
including compute technology ability to do virtual reality for
a while we demand.
And probably they would have used our technology for a whole host of other
purposes as well. You wouldn't just get that technology and, you know,
not be able to create a train or something like that. As I got there,
they'd probably be super intolerance and have the ability to colonize the
universe and do a whole host of other things. Um,
and then for one reason or another,
they would have decided to use some of the resources to,
to create simulations and inside one of those simulations, perhaps,
uh, our experiences would be taking place. Um, so, and then you could,
you could more speculative to fill in more detailed there, but,
but I still think that fundamentally, uh,
our ability to grok this whole thing would be very limited.
And that might be other considerations that
we are oblivious to. That would change. I mean,
if you think about the simulation argument, is it quite recent? Right.
So it's like, it's only less than 20 years old. So if you take that,
so suppose it's correct, for the sake of argument, then up to this point,
everybody was missing something like hugely important and fundamental. Yeah.
Right. Very smart people, hundreds of years, like, yes,
like this, this massive piece right. In the center,
but what's the chances that we now have figured out the last big missing piece.
Like, presumably that must be some father big,
giant realization that that is like beyond us currently.
So I think having some, yeah, I mean, that, that looks kind of possible,
but maybe there are further bigger discoveries or revelations that that would
kind of maybe not falsify the simulation,
but maybe change the interpreter or like do something that is hard to know in
advance. But that would be, it was.
The concept that if there is a simulation that all the stork will record is,
is simulated as well. Well, or when did it take in? Wow.
So there are different options there, right.
And there might be many different simulations that, uh, configure differently.
That could be ones that run for a very long time.
Once that's run for a short period of time,
once that simulates everything and everybody,
others that just focus on some particular scene or person,
like it's just a vast space of possibilities there.
And which ones of those would be most likely,
is it really hard to say much about,
because it would depend on the reasons for creating these simulations?
Like what would the interests of these hypothetical post-human speed. Yeah.